+++
title = "What decentralization means to me"
date = "2024-11-08T09:16:52-07:00"
author = "Alex Kagno"
cover = ""
tags = ["", ""]
keywords = ["", ""]
description = "Decentralization has been co-opted by those attempting to recentralize power for themselves, that's not how it should be used."
showFullContent = false
readingTime = false
hideComments = false
+++

## Decentralization

### A story

I've been fascinated by the internet since I was a small child using my uncle's old ThinkPad and ruining the Windows installation by installing 400 different cursors (and at least that much malware).

Slowly, as I grew up, I watched the internet change from a place where anything was possible to a place where that idea seems quaint and unlikely. This process seemingly happened all at once, but I believe that's partly to do with the idea that these websites that run our lives (Facebook, Twitter, Google) weren't originally walled gardens where data was hoarded. They were still taking that data, sure, but other's outside of the website could leverage that data as well for things like integrations or interoperability. People much more eloquent and experienced than me have been documenting and researching this phenomenon since the internet has existed, and I believe Cory Doctorow's term "enshittification" is an important aspect to this. However, there are new technologies being leveraged on the internet that can seem positive and improvements over the current internet, but will either never actually become a part of the internet in a meaningful way or are merely tools being used by those who want the centralization of power for themselves.

### Different definitions

"**Decentralized**" is a buzz-word that is prevelant all over the web when it comes to new technologies. However, this word can mean two **very** different things depending on who's using it. What's worse, it can be very difficult to determine who the person using the word *is*. Decentralized services sound like a good thing, right? When we imagine the word, it sounds fantastic and much more open and free than the internet currently is. Blockchain, I believe, has made that sell a lot more difficult. **To be clear**, I am not calling all blockchain technologies or services inherently bad. I am merely trying to draw attention to the fact that "**decentralized**" as a term has had it's image tarnished because of the many, **many**, scams and scandals that have come out of the cryptocurrency (and by association blockchain) space. Again, for those in the back, **I am not saying that all blockchain projects are bad**.

I believe the fact that these terms have been linked in a strong way to one another has made it harder to convince non-technologically inclined persons (NTIP, can I make that a thing?) to give legitimate and well supported decentralized platforms a try. What can make this sell even harder is that we have people on the crypto side attempting to support and foster growth for these other projects as well. Again, I don't think this is necessarily bad, but I believe the image crypto has, in many ways rightfully, earned has started to rub off on all decentralized services, not just things attached to Logan Paul or whoever's currently running a pump and dump coin.

Outside of blockchain technologies, there exists a plethora of other decentralized services. Without looking for more, I can name [libre.fm](https://libre.fm)(though, it's not currently usable by a beginner without a lot of additional reading and learning), [Mastodon](https://joinmastodon.org), and [PeerTube](https://joinpeertube.org). These services are designed to be resilient, configurable, and support the idea that, if you don't like your current instance (what your account is set up on and where your data is stored), you can take it and move to another instance without losing everything and having to start over. Instances are managed by people, a team, a company, or a plethora of other organizational indentifiers. These organizations can manage things like how content is moderated, terms of service, and privacy policies. If an instance changes suddenly or becomes defunct, you can move with minimal effort. 

These two different types of decentralization can comingle as well, which becomes challenging to understand if you're an NTIP. Blockchain techologies typically run off of some sort of peer-to-peer protocol, but I'm not as invested in this technology as I used to be. These protocols can be a security nightmare, and also complicate an already complicated process for an NTIP. Web3 is an interesting idea, and I'm all for new standards, but I'm concerned it will never mature enough to encourage people to shift from the current internet (Web1 and Web2) to a completely different paradigm. I'm sure I've scared away any hiring manager that might be working for a crypto company now, but that's okay. I'm not willing to lie about how I feel when it's comes to technology. I won't sugar coat it, and I'm more than willing to change my mind if something happens in the space. 

### A tangent on the concept of Anarchy

The idea I'd like to share regarding decentralized technology mimics a lot of "political theory" (Youtube essays I've watched or podcasts I've listened to; I'm not an academic) I'm aware of regarding how Anarchists treat Anarcho-Capitalists (AnCaps) in their circles. AnCaps are, according to Anarchists, a walking contradiction. 

The philosophy around Anarchism is primarily focused on the idea that heirarchies are inherently bad, and should be avoided or dismantled whenever they crop up. No, they're not all wearing Guy Fawkes masks and attempting to do terrorism. Crazy, right? It also doesn't mean "no government and no rules." In fact, Anarchy as a political philosphy is really just an umbrella term. At least, that's how I've interpreted it. Once the heirarchies have been dismantled (peacefully, please don't come after me for advocating violence, I'm just a nerd on the internet), there are many different ideas around how society would be restructured. Noam Chomsky is a Anarcho-Syndicalist, generally meaning he is in favor of setting up trade unions that would span the gammut of trades and they would interact with each other to provide social services, laws, and regulation. Again, I'm not super well versed in the particulars of this, but I just wanted to establish that Anarchy as a concept has been villified by most modern societies because of a lack of knowledge surrounding it.

Capitalism is a heirarchical system, and therefore is diametrically opposed to Anarchism.

### Wolves in decentralized clothing

I think a big part of why cryptocurrency has taken over decentralization as a concept is due to the kinds of people that support cryptocurrencies. In fact, I suspect many of them are AnCaps. In fact, it's a very interesting line to draw between decentralization and the abolition of hierarchies. Well, maybe not that interesting. It's more or less a straight line, but I'm not sure if there's much discussing it anywhere. Cryptocurrency and blockchain are decentralized, and yet the most notable scams, failures, and successes are typically related to exchanges. Binance, Coinbase, and FTX are some of the more notable exchanges. FTX is defunct and resulted in a lot of very public mess around the people running it. Coinbase, as far as I'm aware, has managed to avoid any serious issues and, from my perspective, is the most reputable exchange you could use. Binance seems to be a magnet for drama, and regularly adds support for new coins and tokens. Many of these end up dying quickly. Outside of the obvious legality issues some of these exchanges are running afoul of, they all break on of the fundamental building blocks of cryptocurrency and blockchain: decentralization. I could probably dive into the concept of ethereum tokens and how things like smart contracts and other blockchain features also end up defeating the purpose of decentralization by centralizing power in one form or another, but I don't really want to make this any longer than it needs to be. Really, I think if you're aware of the buzz-words I just used, you can probably draw the lines yourself. They more or less all end up being centralized in some way by one person or organization. If you look at many of the crypto scams that plague the internet, most of them end up being created by people who continue to hold onto the majority of the supply for their crypto or token, use influencers to pump the price and then sell their stock before it dumps.

These people who are trying to centralize inside of cryptocurrency are just attempting to shift the centralization from one organization or person to another. They're not apart of the 1% and they resent it. Rather than tryiing to redistribute that wealth and power to the masses, they're leveraging the idea of populism to give themselves a leg up on disrupting the status quo and then replacing it with a more complex and environmentally worse facsimile. Replacing Wells Fargo with Coinbase doesn't really do anything for the layperson. It just makes Coinbase founder X more wealthy and potentially (though probably not) bankrupts the owners of Wells Fargo. Cryptocurrency doesn't end up changing anything, and yet it promises everything. You still end up needing all of these additional central sources of control and power in order for it to work, and then the guy who makes it gets rich off of making a worse stock exchange. 

In a way, attempting to decentralize the financial industry is really just a microcosm of what anarchy wants to do, but with an economic system that's naturally predisposed to heirarchy and centralization. The capitalist is the epitome of heirarchy, they have the power and capital to do what they want, and the laborers only have power and capital to potentially control their own material conditions. Sometimes (most times, let's be honest), they don't even have that! Ignoring the intangibles that power and capital provide someone is in part why people can convince themselves that laborers are capable of becoming capitalists. This, I suppose, also turns into a discussion of how Capitalism naturally creates the idea of zero sum. Not everyone can become a capitalist; who would labor to provide profit for them? Regardless of how it is theoretically "fair" and "possible for everyone to own their own business and means of production," that's not the case. The capitalists are incentivized to exert their power over laborers to ensure that they always have laborers to exert power over.

All of this is to say: if you believe that financial centralization is the problem, you should believe that heirarchies are the problem. There's really not much of a difference between the two, and trying to decouple decentralization from anarchy is going to require a lot of cognitive dissonance to reconcile in your head.

And all of that is to say that you should be wary of a person who supports a word you identify with, just because you are taking their use of it charitably. Much like capitalism, financial systems are predisposed to consolidating power within the hands of whoever runs it, and you shouldn't give them that power without really understanding what they want to do with it.

### Probably more? IDK, not sure what else to write

### Supplemental media

#### Watching

#### Reading